Take a moment to have a look around you. You’ll probably see your monitor from which you’re reading, your smart phone on the table,

possibly a cup of coffee or tea, pen and paper, a few accessories and so on.

In ontology jargon, these things are what we call instances or individuals.

An instance is, basically, a single occurrence of something. For example, we could be talking about a couple of Harry Potter

characters like Ron and Harry himself.

We could talk about different locations such as countries which are instances. And when we are referring to specific languages, well, these

are instances too.

In order to create an understanding of how these things come together to mean something, we need to know what

relationships exist between them, in the context of what we want to describe. So, let’s start drawing a few relationships.

For example, Ron knows Harry. Harry was born in the UK. Harry speaks English as a language and also Parseltongue which, if

you’ve watched the movie, you’d recognise this as the language Harry speaks with a snake – I think he only uses it once or

something but anyway, we’re heading on a tangent here. Ok, then we can say English is the primary language of the UK and the USA.

With these relations defined, we can now see a clearer description of the things we are trying to represent. These relations or associations

are the glue between the things we describe in our domain.

In ontology and more generally knowledge graph jargon, a thing tied to another thing via a relation is called a ‘triple’ or a ‘statement’.

It’s basically the fundamental unit for describing and storing knowledge.

Now, if we want to go even further in the definition of our relations, we could start defining some rules and constraints on how

they are used, for example, we could say something like a person necessarily speaks at least one language.

The whole idea behind ontology modelling is about knowing how to abstract these instances by understanding, for example, how they can

be grouped together in a logical way, what they are composed of, how they change over time, and so on.

In our case here, we can abstract, i.e. provide a higher-level description of our individuals this way, where we know we want to capture

persons, countries and languages.

In ontology modelling, these sets that may contain individuals are known as classes. Sometimes, you’ll also hear the terms concept,

category, kind or type being used to refer to a class. A class is a description that accurately specifies the requirements for something to be

a member of it.

For example, if we said that all individuals capable of social interaction are persons, then this might mean that other primates could tick

the box.

But on the other hand, if we said that only individuals who have a social security number are persons, then our requirement for

something to be a member of the class “Person” is noticeably different.

Classes can be arranged in a tree-like structure called taxonomy and because we’re dealing with classes the taxonomy is

sometimes coined as the class hierarchy.

Probably last time you had a stab at building a quick taxonomy was when you created a folder structure.

During the process, you looked at a bunch of folders and realised that it actually made sense to group them together under one

master folder, cos they had something in common. In knowledge modelling, taxonomy works in a similar way, and it provides the

backbone of an ontology.

There’s also one very important understanding behind taxonomy. There’s a special bond, if you wish, between a class and its subclass

which allows us to model what’s called ‘inheritance’.

Inheritance allows a child class to be extended from its parent while inheriting the core attributes and behaviour of the parent class.

For example, let’s say we’re building a knowledge model of the types of documents used in an enterprise, based on a

departmental perspective. It would be logical to have, say, the concept “Company Document” as parent class with child classes

“Finance Document”, “Legal Document”, etc. If we then declare that for something to be a “Company Document” it needs to have some

content in it, this means that any of the child classes also inherits that declaration.

The inheritance relation is said to be transitive, in other words, if the class “Finance Document” derives from “Company Document”

and the class “Expense Document” derives from “Finance Document”, this means that “Expense Document” inherits the requirements

of “Finance Document” as well as those of “Company Document”.

Correct classification is, therefore, vital to the integrity of your knowledge models. For example, it would be problematic breaking

down the class “Person” into “Employee”, “Student”, “Teacher”, etc., simply because as individuals we change roles during our lives.

Also, one might be a student doing some part-time job and is, therefore, an employee at the same time. That would just create a confusing

taxonomy.

So, when designing your taxonomy, it’s always a good idea to think in terms of the classes and their individuals that can exist in the

real-world, and how logically can things be abstracted and represented.

In our example “Person” taxonomy, it would be more precise to simply have the class “Person” and have a separate class “Role” for

actual roles, as instances, that a specific person instance is able to play.

Lastly, everything from our classes, to relations, individuals and rules, basically everything that’s stated or assumed during the

modelling of some subject matter is what we’ll refer to as the “domain of discourse” or “universe of discourse”.