There are two main ways of conveying the structure of a knowledge model.

The first is through visual representation, while the second is through coded representation.

So far, we’ve mostly seen a few snippets of how to visually represent our models, for example, as in this diagram where we used

specific shapes and arrows to express what we’re modelling.

While similar visual models are perfectly suited for human interpretation, this sort of representation doesn’t quite cut it for

computers.

And the reason is simply because visual representations are not encoded in a particularly formal and well-defined language

that computers are able to understand.

Knowledge models that are less formally and less rigorously encoded are said to be ‘lightweight’ ontologies and that includes

ontologies expressed through graphical methods because they make a fundamental assumption; the assumption that the

semantics of our models can readily be understood.

In other words, lightweight ontologies assume that the meaning of the graphical constructs and the entities defined in our universe of

discourse can be understood unambiguously.

Despite this assumption, visual knowledge models work really well for sharing among human beings and have several other benefits

which we’ll be visiting later on.

On the other hand, we have the coded approach to representing ontologies and that’s necessary for us to try make our models mean

something to computers.

Luckily, we don’t have to start from scratch defining a language to encode our knowledge models because past and current initiatives

have developed a range of recommendations for various formal logic-based frameworks and languages for us to choose from.

Some examples of well-known knowledge representation languages are the Knowledge Interchange Format (KIF)

developed in the early 90s, Common Logic (CL), which is also an International Standard, and the Web Ontology Language –

abbreviated to OWL – developed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).

OWL is probably, at present, the most widely used ontology representation language. In this course, you won’t be expected to

manually code your ontologies although this can be achieved if you’re well-versed with the syntax and the semantics of the language.

So, in this course, you’ll learn graphical methods for knowledge modelling and also how to use a Graphical User Interface

application to build your knowledge models coded in the Web Ontology Language (OWL).

