There is a range of criteria we should consider and think of when it comes to choosing the right knowledge representation formalism for

encoding knowledge models, in other words, the representation language itself.

Our choice is likely to be influenced by a number of requirements and the primary ones to consider are:

the expressivity of the language, the semantics of the language; and the level of mathematical rigour provided by the language.

The expressivity of a language is a measure of the range of the constructs that it provides to describe the components of a knowledge

model correctly and explicitly.

For example, if our language only defines the constructs for classes and class hierarchies as taxonomies, and no further support is provided

for other kinds of relations, then we obviously have certain limitations in what we’d like to express and, therefore, we’ll be missing out on

a whole range of other useful kinds of associations.

The semantics of a language, on the other hand, relate to the degree of clarity of meaning in its specification.

For example, let’s say we’re trying to model the notion of “precedence” in using some knowledge representation language.

Does it mean that we can only declare that one distinct event is able to precede a single event at any given time?

Or does it mean that we can have multiple other events that can precede a single event?

Or perhaps something else can happen concurrently?

The clarity of intended meaning in the specification of a knowledge representation language is, therefore, another important

consideration when choosing a knowledge representation language for modelling purposes.

The third important factor lies in the level of mathematical rigour of encoding imparted by a knowledge representation language.

Mathematical rigour relates to the degree of satisfiability and coherence of a representation, i.e., the integrity and

soundness within an ontology.

In mathematical logic, satisfiability is when some statement we’ve declared in our universe of discourse has an interpretation

that makes it true.

Coherence, on the other hand, can be achieved by ensuring some consistency in the way that the entities have been encoded within

the universe of discourse.

The level of mathematical rigour of an ontology depends on the semantics of the chosen knowledge representation language.

Additionally, other factors can also play a part in how mathematically rigorous a knowledge model is, for example, the skill level of the

person doing the modelling work, as well as the features provided in the supporting tools.

Knowledge models that are encoded in a mathematically rigorous way are said to be ‘heavyweight’ ontologies.

Unlike lightweight ontologies, which are less formal and assume that the ontology entities can be readily understood, heavyweight

ontologies, on the other hand, benefit from all the structures of lightweight ontologies. Plus, you get the ability to encode formal axioms

and rules and these additional structures help to clarify the intended meaning of the terms in our knowledge models.

There are several representation languages for data, information and knowledge some more formal and expressive than others.

There are languages for building data models and that have been around for a while, like entity-relationship diagrams and EXPRESS-G.

Others are object based like UML and Frames which are used in wider information modelling as a result of various domain perspectives that

can be captured.

And then there are knowledge representation languages expressed in formal logic like the Resource Description Framework (RDF) and

RDF Schema, as well as the Web Ontology Language (OWL), which are Description Logic (DL) based.

And we also have other knowledge representation languages like Common Logic (CL) and its interchange format, and the

Knowledge Interchange Format (KIF), which are First Order Logic based.

The illustration identified here gives us an idea of the spread of these well-known representation languages in terms of their

degree of expressivity and formality.

Specifically for heavyweight ontology representation, in this course, we’ll be using the Web Ontology Language.

OWL readily supports the modelling of classes, class hierarchies, relations, axioms and individuals.

Furthermore, OWL is also an open standard, it benefits from very good tool support, as well as an active community of users.