Back in our lecture on “ontology from a philosophical perspective” we briefly touched on what it means to have a conceptualisation

of the very basic and fundamental concepts that are common to all knowledge domains.

We saw that these ontologies are called foundational or upper ontologies.

When it comes to ontologies as formal models, different levels of specificity exist from the very generic, to the specific.

In other words, ontologies range in abstraction, in this case the coverage of subject matter they provide.

They can define very general concepts that constitute the foundation for the representation of all knowledge domains.

They can also define concepts that are relevant to very specific domains as well.

Arguably, there are different ways that we could go about discussing what these levels of abstraction are, but I tend to find it really useful

to view ontologies based on the following split.

Foundational ontologies capture the most fundamental concepts of all – things like objects that can endure with time and events

that can span over time.

Other common foundational ideas are things like concrete objects, which can only exist at a single location at a time and as one whole and

abstract things, which do not exist at a single place and as a whole.

The proper construction of foundational ontologies takes time and requires a lot of effort and collaboration across subject matter

specialists.

These types of ontologies tend to be the output from long-term academic projects and other significant initiatives driven by,

for example, the International Standards Organisation (ISO).

Middle level ontologies are more focused than foundational ontologies and are to some extent domain oriented.

However, they are still generic enough to be applicable across many areas.

For example, consider an ontology that provides structures for describing how events occur in time. That ontology can be reused

across any domain that needs to represent events. Our ontology of event representation is not

foundational per se, since each and every kind of fundamental concept is not meant to be defined in that ontology.

However, we’re able to reuse our ontology of event representation and exploit its formal basis to build much more domain-focused,

user-level ontologies. For example, in the case of our ontology of event representation it could be applied to describe events in project

planning, ordering, celebratory events, and so on.

The most specific knowledge models that can be created sit at the user level

and these ontologies are as domain-specific as they can get.

User level ontologies are developed exclusively for their direct intended context. For example, you can have a project planning

ontology that’s specific to your department, which would be an agreed view of how, let’s say, your software development projects

unfold within your team. User level ontologies work well for specific enterprises, groups, information systems,

application tools, and so on.

Designing ontologies doesn’t require you to directly use the whole stack of abstraction levels in order to create your own user level

models. It all depends on what your needs are. It’s always a good thing to have an understanding of how the entities that you

define in your user ontologies relate to those coming from the preceding levels of abstraction.

This way, you’re able to build ontologies that conform better to the core notions of the foundational and middle levels.

Typically though, the foundational and middle level ontologies are helpful for when you have several user ontologies that you want to bring

together and merge into one cohesive lot.

There are loads of ontologies that have been published and are readily available for you to reuse. This means that, in several cases, you

don’t actually need to develop a knowledge model completely from scratch.

You can refer to and reuse various bits and pieces from any existing ontologies, as you see fit.

Here are some examples of various published ontologies that fit into the different levels of abstraction we’ve just discussed.

At the foundational level, we have, for example, the Suggested Upper Merged Ontology a.k.a. SUMO, used for research and

applications in search, linguistics and reasoning.

There’s the Descriptive Ontology for Linguistic and Cognitive Engineering a.k.a. DOLCE, which captures notions central to natural

language and human common-sense.

And there’s ‘gist’, a modular upper ontology developed by the company Semantic Arts.

There’s also the Basic Formal Ontology or BFO which is a well-documented upper ontology.

Then we have the middle level ontologies, where we see examples like the Process Specification Language or PSL, and PSL is

used for the representation of discrete events chiefly in production engineering.

There’s The Zachman Framework which is considered a generic enterprise ontology and more a visual ontology rather than a formally

defined one.

We also can have other middle level models like The Music Ontology.

At the user level, well, we can have anything that’s domain specific – you name it; you can have models that capture jet engine

interactions, models for patent classification, ontologies for describing different kinds of merchandise, and heaps more.

While many ontologies out there fit neatly in our foundational, middle and user levels, you may come across ontologies that span let’s

say both the foundational and middle levels. So, something to remember then is that it isn’t so much about bucketing your knowledge

models into these three specific levels.

You may choose to and that’s totally fine. What matters though, is being able to correctly develop knowledge models that meet your

very specific requirements.