Now that you are more familiar with ontologies, have a good introductory grounding, have some idea about their

importance and understand their philosophical and logic-based perspectives, let’s now run through the most common applications of

knowledge modelling.

Ontologies are exploited as a basis for sharing meaning or semantics and knowledge across human beings and systems.

This applies to all ontologies out there.

Ontologies promote the reuse of domain knowledge and improves the visibility of domain assumptions through explicit

specification.

There are also very strong links between ontologies, information systems and Artificial Intelligence.

Firstly, ontologies are regarded as being platform agnostic. In other words, they are developed using methods that are almost

independent of the technological and implementation constraints of information systems.

This presents an opportunity to encourage interoperability across systems.

Interoperability mustn’t be confused with integration. Whilst integration is about connecting systems to enable data and

information to flow across them, interoperability, on the other hand, is about being able to share information across

systems, without loss of context and meaning associated with that information.

In the area of Information Systems and AI, there’re several applications of ontologies like the Semantic Web which is about connected

web data with enriched meaning.

There’s natural language processing. There’s intelligent search that utilises thesauri and knowledge organisation systems.

There’s information structures for digital twin development e.g. digital twins of factories, jet engines and so on.

There’s medical knowledge representation, repeatable software design and development, intelligent document retrieval, and several

more.

Ontologies are also used to analyse domain knowledge for problem solving and decision-making purposes.

Adequately coded knowledge models and the basis they provide for scaling into structured knowledge bases – you’ll hear the term graph

databases being used for that – so these knowledge bases are set up for querying, reasoning and knowledge retrieval purposes.

A knowledge base or graph database is simply a repository whose underlying information structure is configured via knowledge models.

That’s a key aspect of the so-called ‘knowledge graph’ which is intended to hold lots of interconnected individuals, as well as

the supporting ontology structure.

This way it becomes possible to reuse that knowledge to solve problems and make decisions.

For example, let’s say you have a structured knowledge base containing service knowledge related to different brands of combination

boilers.

You could look up tips on how to troubleshoot your boiler, say if in the middle of winter, you weren’t getting hot water but were able to have

central heating.

One thing to notice here is that there’s a lot of cross-over and overlap between the different areas of application of knowledge modelling,

and the discussion in this lecture is just a glimpse of some of the related applications.

The scope for applying knowledge modelling is vast and that area of practical application is what’s referred to as “applied ontology”.